ADR-0007: Pilot activity bounded context (#35402)
fleetdm/fleet: docs/Contributing/adr/0007-pilot-activity-bounded-context.md

Reviewer: @getvictor thanks again for putting this together! +1 on starting with activity module. Is there a place where you can expand a bit on how this will integrate into our current Fleet service? It looks like @jahzielv's code is merged to main which does this by creating a new activity module in `serve.go` and injecting it into the Android service; is this the general pattern you're envisioning? We've talked about ways to streamline/automate this sort of dependency injection in the future, especially as the dependency graph grows, but I'm fine starting with a manual approach and iterating.

# ADR-0007: Pilot activity bounded context

## Status

Proposed

## Date

2025-11-10

## Context

Fleet's Go codebase has grown to over 680,000 lines of code across over 2,300 Go files (across ee/, orbit/, server/, cmd/, and pkg/ directories). We are continuing the transition to a modular monolith architecture by extracting bounded contexts, taking learnings from [ADR-0001 (Android service layer pilot)](0001-pilot-service-layer-packages.md) and evolving the approach.

### Industry examples of modular monolith architecture

> **GitLab** (Ruby on Rails, 2.2M+ LOC): Successfully transitioned from monolith to modular architecture. Their [modular monolith documentation](https://handbook.gitlab.com/handbook/engineering/architecture/design-documents/modular_monolith) outlines key motivations: avoiding microservices complexity, maintaining code approachability, and enabling better feature boundaries through DDD. As [GitLab CEO stated](https://about.gitlab.com/blog/why-were-sticking-with-ruby-on-rails/#monorails): "A well-structured, well-architected, highly modular program that runs as a single process."

Reviewer 2: Great structure, and GitLab's example of how to transition successfully and transparently.

**Kubernetes** (Go, 500K+ LOC): The kube-controller-manager bundles [30+ independent controllers](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/pkg/controller) (deployment, replicaset, job, namespace, etc.) into a [single binary "to reduce complexity"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/) while maintaining logical separation. Controllers communicate only through the API server, not directly.

### Pain points

The pain points of Fleet's current layered architecture are largely the same as for GitLab's monolith and touched upon in [ADR-0001](0001-pilot-service-layer-packages.md).

> Here's a recent example. In Sprint 49, two product groups added features that touched the exact same lines of code. The security and compliance team added `upgrade_code` field and the software team added custom titles to the software tables. This cross-team conflict was not caught or flagged by the tech leads. After merging the custom titles feature, the `upgrade_code` PR broke. It took ~1.5 engineer days to identify and fix the issue, impacting sprint velocity and reducing the number of bug fixes delivered. With bounded contexts and clear ownership of the DB tables, this issue should not have happened because, among other reasons, the required sequencing of changes would have been obvious to the team owning the bounded context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Sprint 49, overlapping changes from multiple product groups led to a conflict in the same database tables. The Security and Compliance product group introduced an `upgrade_code` field, while the Software product group simultaneously added custom titles to the same schema. This cross-team collision went unnoticed during review, resulting in a broken pull request after the merge. Resolving the issue required approximately 1.5 engineer-days, slowing sprint velocity and reducing capacity for other planned work.

This incident highlights the lack of clear ownership and bounded contexts within the codebase. With well-defined domain boundaries and team ownership of database tables, the sequencing of changes would have been clearer and the conflict likely avoided.
```

Reviewer 2: Maintaining a more analytical, objective tone.

**Key learnings from ADR-0001:** The Android MDM pilot (ADR-0001) kept the datastore layer shared, which limited the benefits of bounded context isolation. This pilot evolves that approach by extracting the **full vertical stack** including data access, following GitLab's proven pattern where each bounded context owns its complete implementation from handlers to database queries. Additionally, we're addressing the lack of clear ownership and architectural enforcement that ADR-0001 didn't fully establish.

### Bounded context design guidelines

**Database transactions:**
- ✅ **Exclusive write ownership**: Each bounded context owns writing to its tables exclusively (no other context writes to them)
- ✅ **Reads allowed across contexts**: Other contexts can read via joins for queries, but this indicates coupling

> - ❌ **DB transactions DO NOT cross bounded context boundaries**: Each transaction must be scoped to a single context's tables to avoid distributed transaction complexity

Reviewer 3: Upcoming activities would be a good thought exercise given the expectations that code and the queue have around transactions that span the upcoming activities table + a number of other tables(software installs, script executions, VPP and possibly soon MDM commands)

> - ❌ **DB transactions DO NOT cross bounded context boundaries**: Each transaction must be scoped to a single context's tables to avoid distributed transaction complexity

Reviewer 2: > it would require radically changing our DB schema

Let's not do this part until we hit Fleet 5.

- ⚠️ **Multi-context writes**: If a use case requires writes to multiple contexts, orchestrate separate transactions via the service layer of the context that owns the API endpoint. Use compensating transactions (Saga pattern) only as a last resort for critical consistency requirements.

**Database schema:**
- ✅ **Single shared database**: All contexts share one MySQL database for operational simplicity (no separate databases per context)

> - ⚠️ **Cross-context joins allowed but scrutinized**: Joins across bounded context tables are permitted for read operations (queries, reports, dashboards), but indicate coupling and should receive extra scrutiny during code review

Author: The simplest approach is to add it to PR template.

A more sophisticated approach would be to run a check in CI that looks for DB table names mentioned in the wrong bounded context. We could then, for example, maintain a list of allowed cross-context joins and require that an entry be added to that list if a new JOIN (or table mention) was added.

**Bounded context communication:**

> - ✅ **Public service APIs only**: Bounded contexts expose public service layer methods (e.g., `ListActivities()`); internal implementation details and datastore methods remain private to the context

Author: Currently, our handlers (controllers) are closely tied to the service. So, we are tying the API to our service calls, often a 1-for-1 match. With bounded contexts, some API calls may need to orchestrate calls to multiple services.

I was thinking that perhaps that orchestration logic should be in its own controller layer (above service). Just an idea now. I haven't tried it.

If that's the case, the API would be somewhat decoupled from service layer methods.

- Activity cleanup and retention (`CleanupActivitiesAndAssociatedData`)

**Potential future expansion:**
- Upcoming activities queue (unified queue)
- Queue management, activation, cancellation

**Explicitly excluded from this context:**
- Batch activities (`batch_activities`, `batch_activity_host_results`) because this belongs to the Scripts bounded context
- The actual triggering of activities (each context creates its own activity instances and passes them to Activity context)

**What Activity context owns:**
- The `ActivityDetails` interface that all activity types must implement
- Storage and retrieval of all past activities

**Activity type definitions (pragmatic approach for this pilot):**
- **Current state**: All ~100 activity type definitions remain in `server/fleet/activities.go` as a shared package
- **Future direction**: As we extract new bounded contexts (Software, Policies, etc.), those contexts should define their own activity types following GitLab's pattern (e.g., `server/software/activities.go` owns `ActivityTypeInstalledSoftware`)

### Folder structure

Following GitLab's bounded context pattern, each context owns its full stack including data access:

> ```text

Reviewer 2: If the pilot goes well, we'll create a handbook page for the modular monolith that documents accepted conventions similar to GitLab's (though not as exhaustive with our resources.)
